---
layout: post
title:  "Building a 486 Gaming PC"
---
Over the summer, I built a 486-based PC for playing DOS games. I didn’t document my progress along the way, so I’m documenting it now retrospectively.
### Why build such an old PC?
I was watching one of LGR’s videos and started thinking about building a PC to play some DOS games. It seemed like a fun research project as well, figuring out how to which components to select and how to build a working PC from them.
### How much money did you spend on this?
Too much.
### How did you select which components to use?
#### Processor
First, I set a target for which processor I wanted to use. I picked the fastest Intel 486, a **DX4-100**. I debated on using newer Cyrix or AMD 486-compatible processors, but decided to stay with an Intel 486. Earlier 25 or 33 MHz processors just do not interest me, I want to build with the fastest of the 486 era. The processor bus is 33 MHz and the core operates with a 3x clock multiplier for an internal operating frequency of 100 MHz.

#### Motherboard
Next, I did some research on chipsets. I found the general consensus among retro computing enthusiasts to be that Silicon Integrated Systems made the best 486-era chipsets, specifically their SiS 496/497 pair. I started researching which motherboards use that chipset and found an ASUS board, the **PVI-486SP3**. It seems to be well regarded by users on Vogons. Socket 4 with 3 PCI and four ISA slots, one of which is also VESA Local Bus. It has a good, stable Award BIOS that is fairly easy to use. It supports up to 512 KB of L2 cache and 128 MB of RAM through two 72-pin SIMMs. Notably, it uses a standard CR-2032 for CMOS instead of a soldered lithium barrel battery or pesky Dallas RTC. And while it does have a good bit of onboard I/O, I do not use most of it. This model pops up on eBay occasionally, usually at a high price. Most of the sellers were international as well. When one from a US-based seller appeared, I bought it immediately.

#### Case
I had been searching for an AT-compatible case for several months. A listing for a new-in-box desktop style AT case popped up. It’s an old, new stock **Micro Center Pro Series** baby-AT case sold by Micro Center’s eBay account. It was in excellent condition, had a turbo button, came with an AT-style power supply, all the original screws and standoffs, and even the key for the keyboard disable lock. I just had to have it. I liked the case styling and the bundled PSU was a nice bonus.

#### Drives
I purchased a late model **Sony MFP-920** 3.5” floppy drive, as one is required for any 486-era PC. I also installed a **TEAC 1.2 MB** 5.25” floppy drive to read and write older disks. For primary storage, I would like to get a Quantum Bigfoot drive. They’ve always seemed cool. Currently, I am using a **ZuluSCSI** drive emulator for convenience. I should get a SCSI CD-ROM drive as well, though I do not know which brands were popular in that era.

#### Cards
##### Video
I happened to have an **ATI Mach32 VLB** video card in my basement, so I used it. Compared to other VLB video cards, it is respectable in DOS gaming performance. Though the Diamond Stealth 64 VLB VRAM is still the performance champion, those are just too expensive.
##### Sound
Using a SoundBlaster 16 was the obvious choice. Most games are designed for SB16 sound and Roland cards are too expensive. The hard part is choosing which Sound Blaster variant. I had purchased a SoundBlaster 16 CT1770 as it could be obtained at a reasonable cost and the onboard SCSI was a nice bonus. But I discovered an original **SoundBlaster 16 CT1740** in my basement and used that instead.
##### SCSI
For this build, I decided to go entirely with SCSI storage. Being a user of classic Macs, I’ve really come to appreciate the elegance of SCSI over ATA. It fits the vintage high-end theme of the build as well. I chose the **Adaptec AHA-1542CF** card, though I won’t be using its onboard floppy controller. The AHA-154x series were popular and thus well supported in terms of driver availability on many operating systems of the day.
##### Network
This one was a bit harder to choose as there were many options and each are well supported in terms of drivers. I ended up going with a **3Com EtherLink III** as it requires minimal configuration.